---
title: About Me
---
Hi!

My name is Sascha Bubeck and I am a PhD student at the [Institute for Theoretical
Chemistry](http://www.tc.uni-koeln.de/) at the [University of
Cologne](https://portal.uni-koeln.de/en/uoc-home),
[Germany](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Germany).  
Welcome to my homepage, which I use to document my process of learning new programming
language features and packages.
My main focus (so far) lies on the programming languages C++ and Haskell.
Haskell provides a way to dive purely into the world of functional
programming, while C++ is a complex, but powerful all-rounder.

# Research Interests

## Quantum Chemistry

Simulating chemical systems is the major goal in quantum chemistry.
Over the last decades, the advances in computer technology and quantum chemical
approaches opened up new possibilities for simulating increasingly larger
systems. Computational demands, however, rapidly increase with the size of
the system to be simulated. Thus, approximations are required for reducing
these demands. Especially the simulation of systems containing heavy atoms is
computationally demanding due to the large number of electrons present in such
systems. Relativistic effects, which are pronounced in these systems and therefore
have to be taken into account, further increase the computational demand.

## Effective Core Potentials (Master Thesis)

One approach, which incorporates relativistic effects and reduces computational
demands for heavy atoms, is the use of effective core potentials (ECPs) [^1].
ECPs, of which pseudopotentials (PPs) are a subclass, are suitable for
application in various quantum chemical approaches, both for wave function- and
density functional-based methods.


One series of PPs, the so-called energy-consistent small-core PPs, were
previously generated by M. Dolg et al. for the
lanthanide [^2] [^3] and
actinide elements [^4] [^5] [^6] and are used for the
majority of simulations of compounds containing these elements.

My master thesis project was focused on the generation of improved PPs of this
type for some of the lanthanide elements.

## Core Polarization Potentials (PhD Thesis)

ECPs employ the frozen-core approximation, which introduces an error by
neglecting the core-core and, more importantly, the core-valence correlation.
One way to describe the majority of these neglected correlations is to use an
additional operator in the Hamiltonian, the so-called
core polarization potential (CPP) operator [^1].

This idea dates back to Born and Heisenberg, who corrected their calculated
Potassium spectra by accounting for the contribution of the
core dipole polarizability [^7]. After this first semi-empirical
application of the CPP operator, Meyer et al. derived the first general
theory and applied it to the first molecular
systems [^8] [^9]. This approach was later used during
the generation of energy-consistent large-core PPs for the alkaline elements
by Fuentalba  et al. [^10] [^11].
The method was then refined by Daudey et al., who extended the CPP by a
projection operator on the spherical harmonics, making the CPPs dependent on the angular 
momentum [^12]. Nowadays, both the l-independent
and l-dependent CPP approaches are used, for example for the
generation of new energy-consistent di-, tri- and tetravalent PPs by
Weigand and Dolg [^13] [^14] [^15] [^16]
or for the simulation of collision experiments by
Gadea et al.[^17] [^18]. Despite the broad use of the
CPP operator in simulations of chemical systems, a systematic investigation of
its influence on atomic and molecular properties is still lacking.

## Goals of the PhD Thesis:

  * [x] Implementation of CPP routine for generating and using CPP integrals in
    quantum chemical simulations into QOL
  * [x] Implementation of interface between Hartree-Fock-SCF simulation and Coupled
      Cluster simulation using the CPP integrals
  * [ ] Investigating the influence of the CPP approach in quantum chemical
      systems

### References

  [^1]: Dolg, M. & Cao, X. Relativistic Pseudopotentials: Their Development and
    Scope of Applications, *Chem. Rev.* **112**, 403-480 (2012).
  [^2]: Dolg, M., Stoll, H. & Preuss, H. Energy-adjusted *ab initio*
  pseudopotentials for the rare earth elements. *J. Chem. Phys.* **90**, 1730
  (1989).
  [^3]: Dolg, M., Stoll, H., Savin, A. & Preuss, H. Energy-adjusted
  pseudopotentials for the rare earth elements. *Theor. Chim. Acta* **75**,
  173-194 (1989).
  [^4]: Küchle, W., Dolg, M. Stoll, H. & Preuss, H. Energy-adjusted
  pseudopotentials for the actinides. Parameter sets and test calculations for
  thorium and thorium monoxide. *J. Chem. Phys.* **100**, 7535-7542 (May 1994).
  [^5]: Cao, X., Dolg, M. & Stoll, H. Valence basis sets for relativistic
  energy-consistent small-core lanthanide pseudopotentials. *J. Chem. Phys.*
  **118**, 487-496 (2003).
  [^6]: Cao, X. & Dolg, M. Segmented contraction scheme for small-core actinide
  pseudopotential basis sets. *J. Mol. Struc-Theochem* **673**, 203-209 (Mar.
  2004).
  [^7]: Born, M. & Heisenberg, W. Über den Einfluß der Deformierbarkeit der Ionen
  auf optische und chemische Konstanten. I *Z. Phys* **23**, 388-410 (Dec. 1924).
  [^8]: Müller, W., Flesch, J. & Meyer, W. Treatment of intershell correlation
  effects in *ab initio* calculations by use of core polarization potentials.
  Method and application to alkali and alkaline earth atoms. *J. Chem. Phys.*
  **80**, 3297-3310 (Apr. 1984).
  [^9]: Müller, W. & Meyer, W. Ground-state properties of alkali dimers and their
  cations (including the elements Li, Na, and K) from *ab initio* calculations
  with effective core polarization potentials. *J. Chem. Phys.* **80**,
  3311 (Apr. 1984).
  [^10]: Fuentealba, P. On the reliability of semi empirical pseudopotentials:
  dipole polarisability of the alkali atoms. *J. Phys. B: At. Mol. Phys.* **15**
  L555-L558 (1982).
  [^11]: Fuentealba, P. Die Rolle der Rumpfpolarisierung in
  Pseudopotentialverfahren. PhD thesis (1982).
  [^12]: Fourcrault, M. Millie, P. & Daudey, J. P. Nonperturbative method for
  core-valence correlation in pseudopotential calculations: Application to the
  Rb2 and Cs2 molecules. *J. Chem. Phys.* **96**, 1257-1264 (Jan. 1992).
  [^13]: Moritz, A., Cao, X. & Dolg, M. Quasirelativistic energy-consistent
  5f-in-core pseudopotentials for divalent and tetravalent actinide elements
  *Theoretical Chemistry Accounts* **118**, 845-854 (June 2007).
  [^14]: Weigand, A., Cao, X., Yang, J. & Dolg, M. Quasirelativistic f-in-core
  pseudopotentials and core-polarization potentials for trivalent actinides and
  lanthanides: molecular test for trifluorides. *Theoretical Chemistry Accounts*
  **126**, 117-127 (May 2009).
  [^15]: Weigand, A., Cao, X., Hangele, T. & Dolg, M. Relativistic Small-Core
  Pseudopotentials for Actinium, Thorium, and Protactinium. *J. Phys. Chem A*
  **118** 2519-2530 (2014).
  [^16]: Weigand, A. Relativistic Energy-consistent Pseudopotentials for
  f-Elements. PhD thesis (Universität zu Köln, 2009).
  [^17]: Souissi, H., Mejrissi, L., Habli, H., Al-Ghamdi, A. A., Oujia, B. &
  Gadéa, F. X., Spectroscopic *ab initio* investigation of the electronic
  properties of (SrK)<sup>+</sup>. *Chem. Phys.* **490**, 19-28 (June 2017).
  [^18]: Mtiri, S., Mejrissi, Habli, H., Al-Ghamdi, A. A., Oujia & Gadéa, F. X.
  Theoretical investigation of the diatomic Van der Waals systems Ca<sup>+</sup> and CaHe.
  *Comput. Theor. Chem.* **1114**, 33-46 (Aug. 2017).
